.TH ncdu 1 "Aug 13, 2010" "ncdu-git" "ncdu manual"

.SH NAME
\fBncdu \fP- NCurses Disk Usage

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBncdu\fP [\fB-hqvx\fP] [\fB--exclude\fP \fIPATTERN\fP] [\fB-X\fP \fIFILE\fP] \fIdir\fP

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBncdu\fP (NCurses Disk Usage) is a curses-based version of
the well-known 'du', and provides a fast way to see what
directories are using your disk space.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-h\fP
Print a small help message
.TP
\fB-q\fP
Quiet mode. While calculating disk space, \fBncdu\fP will
update the screen 10 times a second by default, this
will be decreased to once every 2 seconds in quiet
mode. Use this feature to save bandwidth over remote
connections.
.TP
\fB-v\fP
Print version.
.TP
\fB-x\fP
Only count files and directories on the same
filesystem as the specified \fIdir\fP.
.TP
\fB--exclude\fP PATTERN
Exclude files that match PATTERN. This argument can
be added multiple times to add more patterns.
.TP
\fB-X\fP FILE, \fB--exclude-from\fP FILE
Exclude files that match any pattern in FILE. Patterns
should be separated by a newline.

.SH KEYS
.TP
\fB?\fP
Show help + keys + about screen
.TP
\fBup, down j, k\fP
Cycle through the items
.TP
\fBright, enter, l\fP
Open selected directory
.TP
\fBleft, <, h\fP
Go to parent directory
.TP
\fBn\fP
Order by filename (press again for descending order)
.TP
\fBs\fP
Order by filesize (press again for descending order)
.TP
\fBa\fP
Toggle between showing disk usage and showing apparent size.
.TP
\fBd\fP
Delete the selected file or directory. An error message will be shown
when the contents of the directory do not match or do not exist anymore
on the filesystem.
.TP
\fBt\fP
Toggle dirs before files when sorting.
.TP
\fBg\fP
Toggle between showing percentage, graph, both, or none. Percentage
is relative to the size of the current directory, graph is relative
to the largest item in the current directory.
.TP
\fBe\fP
Show/hide 'hidden' or 'excluded' files and directories. Please note that
even though you can't see the hidden files and directories, they are still
there and they are still included in the directory sizes. If you suspect
that the totals shown at the bottom of the screen are not correct, make
sure you haven't enabled this option.
.TP
\fBi\fP
Show information about the current selected item.
.TP
\fBr\fP
Refresh/recalculate the current directory.
.TP
\fBq\fP
Quit

.SH HARD LINKS
Every disk usage analysis utility has its own way of (not) counting hard links.
There does not seem to be any universally agreed method of handling hard links,
and it is even inconsistent among different versions of ncdu. This section
explains what each version of ncdu does.
.P
ncdu 1.5 and below does not support any hard link detection at all: each link
is considered a separate inode and its size is counted for every link. This
means that the displayed directory sizes are incorrect when analyzing
directories which contain hard links.
.P
ncdu 1.6 has basic hard link detection: When a link to a previously encountered
inode is detected, the link is considered to have a file size of zero bytes.
Its size is not counted again, and the link is indicated in the browser
interface with a 'H' mark. The displayed directory sizes are only correct when
all links to an inode reside within that directory. When this is not the case,
the sizes may or may not be correct, depending on which links were considered
as "duplicate" and which as "original". The indicated size of the topmost
directory (that is, the one specified on the command line upon starting ncdu)
is always correct.
.P
ncdu 1.7 has improved hard link detection. Each file that has more than two
links has the "H" mark visible in the browser interface. Each hard link is
counted exactly once for every directory it appears in. The indicated size of
each directory is therefore, correctly, the sum of the sizes of all unique
inodes that can be found in that directory. Note, however, that this may not
always be same as the space that will be reclaimed after deleting the
directory, as some inodes may still be accessible from hard links outside it.

.SH BUGS
Directory hard links are not supported. They will not be detected as being hard
links, and will thus be scanned and counted multiple times.
.P
Some minor glitches may appear when displaying filenames that contain multibyte
or multicolumn characters.
.P
Please report any other bugs you may find at the bug tracker, which can be
found on the web site at http://dev.yorhel.nl/ncdu

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Yoran Heling <projects@yorhel.nl>.

.SH SEE ALSO
\fBdu\fP(1)
